Path  cantaloupe srv cs cmu edu magnesium club cc cmu edu news sei cmu edu cis ohio state edu zaphod mps ohio state edu usc news service uci edu ucivax ofa    Wales Larrison
From  Wales Larrison ofa    fidonet org
Newsgroups  sci space
Subject  Commercial Space News    
X Sender  newtout      Feb        
Message ID         a  ofa    fidonet org 
Date     Apr            
Lines     

COMMERCIAL SPACE NEWS SPACE TECHNOLOGY INVESTOR NUMBER   

   This is number twenty two in an irregular series on commercial 
space activities   The commentaries included are my thoughts on 
these developments   

   Sigh    as usual  I ve gotten behind in getting this column 
written   I can only plead the exigency of the current dynamics in 
the space biz   This column is put together at lunch hour and after 
the house quiets down at night  so data can quickly build up if 
there s a lot of other stuff going on   I ve complied a lot of 
information and happenings since the last column  so I m going to 
have to work to keep this one down to a readable length   Have fun  

CONTENTS 
   US COMMERCIAL SPACE SALES FLATTEN IN     
   DELTA WINS TWO KEY LAUNCH CONTRACTS
   COMMERCIAL REMOTE SENSING VENTURE GETS DOC  GO AHEAD 
   INVESTMENT FIRM CALLS GD S SPACE BIZ  STILL A GOOD INVESTMENT  
   ARIANE PREDICTS DIP IN LAUNCH DEMAND
   NTSB INVESTIGATES PEGASUS LAUNCH OVER ABORTED ABORT
   ANOTHER PEGASUS COMPETITOR IS ANNOUNCED
   GEORGIA LAUNCH SITE DROPPED FROM PLANNING
   SPAIN S CAPRICORNIA LAUNCHER STILL PROCEEDING
    PACASTRO SIGNS LAUNCH RESERVATION WITH SWEDISH SPACE CORP
    CHINA AND TAIWAN JOINT SATELLITE VENTURE REPORTED
    SOUTH KOREA ANNOUNCES NATIONAL MOVE INTO SPACE TECHNOLOGIES
    SPACE TECHNOLOGY INDEXES THROUGH MARCH
FINAL NOTES
  
ARTICLES
                                                                    
   US COMMERCIAL SPACE SALES FLATTEN IN     
   The US Department of Commerce projects US commercial space sales 
will remain flat in       with current data showing only a   percent 
growth over        As published in  US Industrial Outlook       
 which was released in January   revenues from the      US space 
business are currently projected to be about        M  
   In contrast to previous years when US commercial space sales had 
shown double digits growth rates  this year s projected results are 
driven by the US satellite manufacturing industry  where sales are 
projected to drop from    satellites worth        M in      to   
satellites worth       M in        The US Industrial Outlook also 
projects U S  commercial launchers faces flat demand in coming year  
and while predicting that      revenues will increase    percent to 
     M  future sales will be  adversely affected by the downward 
revision in Department of Defense launch plans                             
   Offsetting flat launch revenues and satellite deliveries  
revenues for fixed and mobile satellite services are projected to 
increase to        M  primarily driven by increased revenues from 
broadcast and cable TV networks   Similarly  remote sensing products 
and sales are projected to increase to      M in       up       

 US COMMERCIAL SPACE REVENUES                            r       e 
 Commercial satellites                                            
 Satellite services                                               
   Fixed                                                           
   Mobile                                                          
 Satellite ground equip                                           
   Mobile equipment                                               
 Commercial launches                                              
 Remote sensing data and services                                 
 Private microgravity research lab                                
                                                                   
   TOTAL ANNUAL REVENUES                                           
         r    revised data for         e    estimated data for     
    Commentary  This is the first look at how the US commercial 
space industry is expected to do in        In general  not a bad 
report    with most of the bad news concentrated in the satellite 
manufacturing area   There  changes of only a few satellites worth 
     M or so apiece can substantially influence the annual 
projection   If we look forward over several years  this market 
sector should retain strong sales as US firms have been very 
successful in regaining international market share in the satellite 
business  
   Furthermore  sales of satellite ground equipment should go up in 
the next revision of this data  expected to be released about mid 
year   Data on mobile satellite ground equipment sales  including 
such items as GPS receivers and portable satellite terminals  
appears to be missing from the January data set   DoC usually 
publishes a listing of   Space Business Indicators  in mid year  and 
the next revision of commercial space revenues should be released 
then   I expect the revised revenues should easily top        M  if 
the mobile satellite ground equipment are added back into the 
numbers  and the year should show about a     overall market growth  
   Looking beyond this year s data  future markets look quite 
promising   The DoC projects satellite service revenues could top 
       M by      if new mobile satellite services and direct 
broadcasting are implemented as planned  and that mobile satellite 
station sales are expected to continue to growth at         per year 
through the mid      s   My numbers are somewhat more pessimistic 
for near term market growth  but I agree the trend should be for 
substantial growth in US commercial space sales over at least the 
next      years    My pessimism is due to more conservative 
assumptions on market capture and growth in LEO communications and 
satellite direct broadcasting services   I don t believe all of the 
current players in the yet to be born LEO communications satellite 
market and in the yet to be proven direct broadcasting market will 
be financial successes  nor that sales growth will be as explosive 
as currently projected   
   It should also be noted this year s DoC data is the first 
release to show revenues from privately funded microgravity research 
facilities   The     M shown in the Janurary data is primarily for 
the Spacehab module  planned for launch in April on the Space 
Shuttle  but also hidden in these numbers are the projected first 
sales from the COMET orbital launch and recovery experiment module   

   DELTA WINS TWO KEY LAUNCH CONTRACTS
   McDonnell Douglas Corporation  which builds and markets the Delta 
launch vehicle has won two important launch contracts   Motorola 
Inc  announced in mid February that it had selected the Delta to 
launch most of the satellites in the    satellite Iridium LEO 
communications constellation  and in mid April  McDonnell Douglas 
was awarded the USAF Medium Launch Vehicle III contract  
   The launch services contract with Motorola for the Iridium 
constellation launch is for at launch of least    Iridium 
satellites   Another    satellites have been contracted to be 
launched by Khrunichev Enterprise in Russian on   Proton vehicle 
launches   These    satellites planned for the Delta will be 
launched   at a time   providing for at least   launches   
Additional satellites in the Iridium constellation  such as a 
planned on orbit spares  may also be launched on Delta   Although 
details of the launch services contract were reported to be 
negotiation  and not yet final  
   The USAF MLV contract also went to MDC  bidding a variant of 
their Delta II launcher   This contract is only initially worth      
million  but establishes a set of launch options for up to    
launches  encompassing launches from      through        These 
launches will deploy the next generation of the USAF s Global 
Positioning System Block IIR navigation satellites  plus other 
programs   First option for to meet the USAF launch options is 
expected to be exercised this year  after which the USAF is expected 
to request launches of up to   Deltas per year for at least   years   
Under this contract the USAF can also request  launch on demand  
services from MDC for the           time period  with a launch to 
occur within    days of the request  
     Commentary   If these two contracts are fulfilled  they should 
provide an excellent business base for MDC s Delta launch program 
through the turn of the century   Combined  these two contracts have 
a potential for about    launches  worth about        M to MDC  and 
sustaining a core business base of          M year   Other contracts 
for international and commercial payloads  as well as for NASA 
Medium ELV class payloads  will add to this business base    keeping 
MDC as a viable commerical launch company  
    However  it should be noted there are risk elements in these 
contracts   Motorola s Iridium LEO communications constellation has 
not yet received a US Federal Communications Commission license for 
operation in the U S   nor has Motorola lined up all the financing 
and financial partners for the Iridium venture   Without these 
approvals or financial backing there will be no Iridium launches   
But  hopefully  these uncertainties will be settled this year  
   Similarly  the USAF MLV III program has been the target of 
several Congressional actions which have slowed the production of 
the GPS Block IIR satellites and deleted the funding for the MLV III 
program in favor of the USAF NLS  Spacelifter  program   At this 
time  while it appears the MLV III contract will be executed  future 
funding for the MLV III and other USAF commercial launch contracts 
is being reconsidered as part of national space launch strategy 
reviews   Some opinions expressed from within the Administration and 
Congress propose cancellation of all  ELV upgrade  programs 
 including the MLV programs  in favor of the proposed  Spacelifter  
program   Such opinions may have some weight in this year s budget 
deliberations  particularly as DoD funds will be more difficult to 
find in the shrinking US Defense budget   
 
   COMMERCIAL REMOTE SENSING VENTURE GETS DOC  GO AHEAD 
   The first commercial license to operate a remote sensing 
satellite was approved in early February by the US Department of 
Commerce s Office of Space Commerce   A license was granted to 
WorldView Imaging Corporation of Oakland  California to build and 
operate a pair of LEO imaging satellites to provide multi spectral 
images of the Earth  
    Commentary   There has been little data released on this venture 
by WorldView and the DoC  other than the announcement of the 
operating and construction license   This was reported to be at the 
request of WorldView   Most industry speculation identifies this new 
venture as a  Star Wars  spinoff  using SDI type technology to 
provide digital Earth sensing data  and heavily integrated into 
digital GIS databases for remote sensing GIS users   Most probable 
customers for this service include exploration geologists  
agricultural planners  and urban planners   
   It is noteworthy this is the first commercial venture under the 
     Land Remote Sensing Policy Act   The Act  as passed last 
November  provides that remote sensing data gathered from private remote 
sensing craft may be sold to users at differing prices   Prior to 
this act  remote sensing data from all satellites had to be sold to 
all users at the same prices  and private remote sensing ventures 
would have had to sell at the government set Landsat data prices  
   There are rumors of several other potential commercial remote 
sensing ventures working their way through the system at different 
stages of development   I think the large Landsat and SPOT satellite 
systems will provide the majority of the satellite remote sensing 
data market for the next decade or so   In contrast to these large  
government sponsored remote sensing systems  smaller market ventures 
such as WorldView and others can exploit market niches and use 
innovative technology  and I believe  can find profitability on the 
margin   I predict there may be some very interesting ventures 
appearing in the next year or so   
                 
   INVESTMENT FIRM CALLS GD S SPACE BIZ  STILL A GOOD INVESTMENT  
   Wall Street investment house Morgan Stanley thinks General 
Dynamic s Space Systems Division could still be a moneymaker  
despite having failed in the last   Atlas launches   In a recent 
analyst s report Morgan Stanley said  We are more than ever 
convinced that if the company can return the Atlas to its historical 
    plus success rate  this will become a highly profitable  cash 
generating unit    Based upon discussions with GD s corporate 
management  Morgan Stanley projects that if the Atlas problems are 
cleared up the unit could see     M in earnings per year by      and 
     M per year by        This is based upon GD s projection of 
capturing about    Atlas launches per year on the world market  
    Commentary   Three failures in a row of their launch system has 
hurt General Dynamic s Space Systems Division   Since GD has 
restructured to only keep a very few profitable core businesses  
many market pundits have been speculating GD s space business might 
be next to be sold   The Morgan Stanley report indicates GD s Space 
Systems Division has some potential as a moneymaker  despite current 
problems    if they can get their act together   Sales are projected 
to be about      M in       which will probably generate a loss of 
about     M   If GD can capture their projected share of the space 
launch market  and if they have managed to clean up the reliability 
of their Atlas launchers  then they could generate healthy profits 
from those sales   But until they demonstrate the Atlas Centaur 
program is back on track  this division will continue to show 
substantial losses  
   In response to the sell off rumors  in my opinion  this operation 
is not a really good candidate for takeover and quick profitability   
To do such a takeover  the current set corporate and divisional 
management would be replaced with another set from outside the firm   
In GD SSD s case  to get the division back on track  the management 
team will have to concentrate hard on the technical problems with 
the Atlas Centaur  as well as in selling Atlas services   This would 
indicate only another firm with experience in rocket launch 
operations could find such talent in house  and be able to convince 
customers to buy their launch services   Optimally  the firm would 
have substantial liquid rocket experience  and experience in 
marketing space technology internationally as well   Candidates for 
this might be TRW  Rockwell  Lockheed  and Martin  and possibly 
McDonnell Douglas and Boeing   But most of those firms have cash 
flow problems  MDC   have had a substantial business contraction 
 Boeing and MDC   are involved with other launch firms  Lockheed   
or have taken on substantial debt  Martin    And coming up with the 
          M purchase price for the division is a big chunk of 
change for any company   
 
    ARIANE PREDICTS DIP IN LAUNCH DEMAND
   Arianespace  the operator of the Ariane launch system  is 
projecting a dip in launch demand in the late      s   In early 
February  Arianespace released their annual market survey  which 
detailed their projection of the space transportation market for the 
next decade  
   Over short run  Arianespace expects to retain their dominant 
position and sustain a majority share of the launch market   Of    
international and commercial launches planned through       Ariane 
holds contracts for     General Dynamics  Atlas vehicle holds    
contracts  McDonnell Douglas  Delta holds    and Great Wall s Long 
March vehicle holds   launch contracts  
   Three quarters of future launch contracts for which Ariane can 
compete are projected to come from communications satellites with 
the remaining     split between weather  Earth observation  and 
scientific satellites   Most of the future telecommunications demand 
growth is predicted to come from the Asia Pacific region  
   Arianespace expects the current market consolidation of 
individual satellite operators into regional or national groups will 
continue  with these groups investing in heavier satellites with 
larger communications payloads carrying more transponders  
Arianespace predicts the average mass of telecommunications 
satellites should increase by      over today s average level  to 
about      kg in GEO  
   Demand for commercial launch services is expected to remain 
strong over the next three years  but in the second half of the 
decade  Arianespace predicts demand will decrease   Arianespace 
bases this prediction upon a matching of satellite transponder 
demand and supply   particularly as new data compression techniques 
appear to could double or triple transponder capacity using existing 
or near term transponders  
   One of the significant possible changes in the market was 
identified as the arrival of new launch vehicles  including Russian 
launch systems   But Arianespace predicts that in the long term  
investors purchasing launch services are looking for the best trade 
off between launch service quality and price  and that Russian and 
other new launch services will have to prove out their capabilities 
and service quality  and their market penetration will be minimal  
    Commentary   Ariane releases their market surveys annually  and 
I reported on their prior market survey in a past issue of CSN STI   
Comparing the two surveys  there aren t outstanding differences in 
the numbers    The most notable change is the consideration of new 
data compression techniques  reducing the demand for new physical 
transponders on orbit 
   I note that in contrast to some predictions  demand for space 
based communications transponders appears to be remain strong  While 
fiber optic lines are making substantial inroads into the 
established point to point telecommunications markets  growing 
demand for telecommunications services world wide and for point to 
multipoint broadcast services have prevented a decrease in space 
transponder demand   Fiberoptic cables provide a higher capability 
service  but only from established point A to established point B  
To establish a fiberoptic link it is necessary to install cable 
between the points  and while there are improved network solutions  
installing a large network of distributed fiberoptic links can cost 
millions or billions of dollars   
   For broadcast services where there is not an existing ground 
network structure  satellites still offer the most cost effective 
solution   And if new services are required into a new region  it is 
cheaper to install a small satellite link costing only a few tens of 
thousands of dollars and tie into the existing global satellite 
network   This allows rapid growth of new satellite services  and 
has kept demand high   The replacement market for fiberoptics is 
growing as well  since as demand grows between the points serviced  
it becomes cost effective to later install a fiberoptic link to 
handle the increase in traffic  
   Since the telecommunications and data transfer markets are still 
growing rapidly  satellite market projections remain rosy   But 
satellites are also getting longer orbital lifetimes   Current 
generation satellites are now getting guarantees of at    years of 
on orbit service or more  in contrast to    years of service from 
last generation s satellites   This has cut back some of the launch 
demand  as satellite owners are rescheduling replacement satellite 
launches over longer intervals  
   And as last note  Arianespace didn t flag it this year  but it 
looks like the space transportation market will be rather over 
supplied by existing launch systems in the near term   The annual 
commercial launch demand is for about       medium sized satellites 
per year   From the supply side  Ariane is capable of launching up 
to about a dozen medium sized satellites a year  Delta is capable of 
about      per year  Atlas is capable of       Long March      
Japan s H Vehicle      Russia s Proton capable of    and other 
systems such as Zenit and Soyuz another       medium launches per 
year   That s a lot of capability for a small market  
   We can only expect the competition to intensify for commercial 
launches  

   NTSB INVESTIGATES PEGASUS LAUNCH OVER ABORTED ABORT 
   The   Feb Pegasus launch by Orbital Sciences Corporation has 
spawned an investigation over an apparent violation of range safety 
rules   A valid abort order from a NASA range safety officer to halt 
the mission was overridden and the Pegasus was launched in violation 
of range safety rules   
   In the last few minutes of the Pegasus launch countdown  one of 
two abort command receivers aboard the Pegasus failed   Such a failure 
typically scrubs a launch and a NASA range safety officer at 
Wallops Island  VA issued a mission abort order about a minute 
before the scheduled Pegasus launch   Somehow this command was 
overridden by the OSC launch team or the message was lost in the 
communications channels  and the Pegasus was launched despite the 
valid abort call  
   Fortunately  the Pegasus functioned as expected  and the abort 
command receiver was not needed   But this incident did spark an 
investigation since a valid abort order was given under agreed to 
launch constraint rules  and was not obeyed  
   Leading the investigation is the National Transportation Safety 
Board  NTSB  with support from NASA  OSC  and the Air Force   This 
investigation marks the first time NTSB has taken the lead on an 
incident involving a space launch   According to the NTSB  their 
investigation will take about   months  and is primarily looking at 
lines of authority  communications links and safety procedures used 
in the launch  
   Commentary  This is the first time that the NTSB has led an 
investigation into a space launch   Their leadership was requested 
by the Department of Commerce s Office of Commercial Space 
Transportation  who had licensed the commercial launch   
   At the time of writing this column  some of the initial 
investigations have been concluded  and some of the results are 
starting to leak out into the trade press   Apparently    or four 
different communications channels were in use during the test  After 
the abort destruct receiver stopped responding  the NASA test 
director and range controller in the Mission Control room at Wallops 
Island gave abort orders about a minute before the launch   
According to the mission rules  this should have stopped the launch  
Somehow  the OSC test conductor ordered the abort reversed  and the 
NASA communicator on the net relayed that order to the B    carrying 
the Pegasus at about    seconds before launch   Differing 
explainations of exactly how this happened are proposed    with the 
best set being that clear lines of communications and clear 
definition of the responsibilities of the mission control team  and 
understanding of the mission rules were not established before the 
launch   
   As we see more and more commercial launches  more of these 
procedural issues are going to crop up and will have to be resolved    
This case is interesting because it is the first time the NTSB has 
been called in to investigate a commercial launch problem  as they 
do with commercial aircraft problems    
   I think this problem will turn out to be primarily problems with 
procedures and communications  and will be cleared up with issuance 
of guidelines on how launch communications should be set up and how 
specific lines of authority should be delineated   

   ANOTHER PEGASUS COMPETITOR IS ANNOUNCED
   Tsniimach Enterprise in Russia announced it is marketing a new 
small space launch system  based upon converted ICBM components   
Two versions of the launcher are being marketed  the  Aerokosmos  
winged vehicle launched like the OSC Pegasus  and the  Severkosmos   
launched from a mobile ground transporter   The Aerokosmos is 
projected to deliver     kg to a     km circular orbit or     kg to 
an     km circular orbit  and the Severkosmos to be capable of     
kg to     km orbits and     kg to     km   Also proposed to be used 
with these launch systems is a LEO data relay system called 
 Sineva    Tsniimach Enterprise is described as a ex military 
establishment  focusing on aerodynamics and thermal protection of 
spacecraft and which has participated in the development of the 
Buran shuttle system   They are located near the NPO Energia 
facility in Kaliningrad  outside of Moscow  
    Commentary  There s very little released information on this new 
venture   My suspicion is it is another Russian enterprise looking 
for hard currency and trying to capitalize upon their in house 
knowledge of ex Soviet launch systems   It adds to the list of numerous 
commercial space startups announced from the ex Soviet Union  
   This one s a little different in that they are offering variants 
of ex Soviet ICBMs  but I can t identify any key customers being 
targeted or substantial financial backing  

   GEORGIA LAUNCH SITE DROPPED FROM PLANNING
   In late January  Georgia Tech Research Institute released the 
results of a preliminary study on the feasibility of a commercial 
rocket launching site in Camden County  Georgia at the old Kingsland 
Missile Test Launching Site on the Atlantic coast   The preliminary 
study recommended the site not be pursued as a commercial launch 
site  stating reopening the site was not feasible due to projected 
low investment returns  plus environmental and other geographic 
considerations   However  the report did say the site might be ideal 
for other aerospace uses  and recommended other potential uses  
    Commentary   This should put the nails in the coffin of the 
Kingsland Commercial Launch Site   While other sites are still 
proceeding with commercial launch site development plans  Kingsland 
found without a key customer to act as anchor tenant  and if 
substantial infrastructure had to be put in  then the expected 
returns were too low to justify the cost of development   
   This might point out some key discriminators in judging the 
feasibility of a commercial launch site   These include 
    Is there an identified key customer to provide core usage 
sufficient to recover setup costs 
    Is there a market advantage of using the site 
    Can existing infrastructure be used or modified at the site 
    Can financing be found at low enough cost to support the 
investment   
   Other commercial launch site ventures    including those at 
Woomera  Poker Flat  Cape York  White Sands  Alabama Off Shore 
Platform  Hawaii  and Vandenberg have to also be judged against 
these criteria   In my opinion  some of these ventures are flying 
on hope and speculation  and not on sound financial grounds  

   SPAIN S CAPRICORNIA LAUNCHER STILL PROCEEDING
   In one of his last official acts  former President Bush 
authorized space technology transfer for several joint space 
ventures between US and other firms   One of these was a proposed 
use of US technology by Spain to build a small booster   With that 
regulatory impediment removed  the   stage Capricornia launch 
vehicle will start development later this year  planning for a first 
launch in the         time period   The Capricornia is described as 
a small   stage all solid booster designed to put         Kg into 
LEO   Several launch sites are being examined for the system  
including   on the Iberian peninsula and   on the Canary Islands   
Originated by INTA in Spain  the project reports it has      M in 
development funding  and will use technology from Argentina s Condor 
launch vehicle as well as from the US  
    Commentary   Several firms have identified a market opportunity 
in providing a small launcher for the European market   Small 
payloads from European firms or organizations currently use either 
Ariane piggyback launches or the US Italian Scout launcher   
However  Ariane piggyback opportunities are limited  and the Scout 
program is being phased out  accompanied by some disarray in the 
Italian government and space industry regarding any follow on 
system    
   This has left an apparent niche for a new European small launch 
system   Surprisingly enough  ESA has not supported development of 
such a system within the current space funding structure   Studies 
have been performed by British Aerospace  Aerospatiale  Deutsche 
Aerospace  and Italian organizations  but with the exception of the 
Swedish PacAstro system  reported below   I have not been able to 
find any other European development work with even a rumor of 
funding for hardware  
   Also of interest is the linking of the Capricornia to the 
Argentinian Condor launcher   There have been some interesting 
rumors surfacing out of Argentina over the past year about a space 
launcher IRBM program funded under the military junta which ruled 
the country in the      s and early      s  
   What is known is in Feb       the Argentinian Air Force formally 
transferred control of the Condor   missile program to the new 
civilian Argentinian national space agency  Comison Nacional de 
Atividades Espaciales   CNAE    The Condor   program was described 
as originating in       expanding upon the smaller Condor   rocket 
program in collaboration with Egypt and with support of German 
firms   The Condor   was also reportedly funded indirectly by Iraq 
in the mid      s   Fairly large solid rocket motors were built and 
tested  but Argentinan development of a suitable guidance package 
lagged that of the propulsion system  
   It should be noted CNAE is planning to launch its first 
scientific satellite in late        The US    M      Kg  SAC B 
satellite will study the Earth s upper atmosphere and includes 
cooperative experiments from Italy and the US  No launch vehicle has 
yet been selected  but OSC s Pegasus and the Russian Burlak Air 
launched rocket are reported to be strong contenders for this 
contract   

    PACASTRO SIGNS LAUNCH RESERVATION WITH SWEDISH SPACE CORP
   PacAstro  a small launch firm in Herndon  Virginia announced in 
late February it had received a    M launch reservation contract 
from the Swedish Space Corp to launch a satellite on PacAstro s PA   
launch vehicle    This will be performed as part of the Polar 
Satellite Service  PSS   a joint Norwegian Space Center  Swedish 
Space Corp  program to upgrade the Andoya Rocket Range in Norway and 
offering small satellite launches into the polar regions   According 
to PacAstro  PSS is also performing an    M upgrade of the Andoya 
launch facilities  including a new integration facility and a fully 
enclosed vertical assembly building for small launch vehicles like 
the PacAstro PA     PacAstro has been chosen as  the main 
alternative rocket supplier  for the small satellite launch service 
to be offered by PSS from Andoya   The date of the launch of the 
Swedish satellite was not specified  
    Commentary   PacAstro has been trying to line up customers and 
funding for their launch vehicle for some time now   The PA   is a 
small  two stage rocket fueled by RP   and Liquid Oxygen   From 
PacAstro s literature  the engines designed for the PA series 
rockets are built of  off the shelf  components based upon the Lunar 
MOdule Descent Engines built by TRW  and are capable of putting a 
    Kg satellite into a     km circular polar orbit   
   PacAstro is trying to arrange construction financing for its 
first three PA   vehicles  with a first launch planned for       and 
  orbital launches planned for        My records show PacAstro hired 
TRW to provide marketing support and systems design   with primary 
engineering to be done by AeroAstro  a small satellite builder 
closely associated with PacAstro  headquartered in the same 
building    The Swedish Space Corporation would supply engineering  
launch operations  vehicle subsystems  and marketing support  
Sumitomo Corp  of Tokyo  is a first round investor and sits on the 
board of directors   
   PacAstro has gotten a first round financial package of at least 
     K   Some sources place this of high as    M   but has been 
searching for about a year for the additional        M needed to 
design  build and launch their first set of vehicles  
   The launch reservation from SSC can possibly be used to help 
bring some investors on board  but by my estimate  they will need 
much more than the single    M sale to put their venture into real 
hardware   

    CHINA AND TAIWAN JOINT SATELLITE VENTURE REPORTED
    In early March  it was reported a joint satellite communications 
venture between a Taiwanese and mainland Chinese was in the works   
As reported in the Taipei press  China Development Corp   CDC   
headquartered in Taiwam and with links to the ruling Nationalist 
Party  is planning to set up a joint venture in Hong Kong with China 
Great Wall Industry Corp  with the objective of launching a regional 
communications satellite  CDC would cover about     of the satellite 
system cost  US     M  in exchange for rights to     of the 
satellite s communications channels   
    Commentary   This announcement came close on the heels of the 
release of Taiwanese plans for space development  released in mid 
January     In those plans  the National Space Program Office of 
Taiwan will launch   satellites  starting with ROCSAT    a     Kg 
scientific spacecraft  planned for launch in        Two additional 
satellites are planned  both communications satellites    TRW has 
been helping Taiwan plan this program  budgeted at T      B  US      
M  through        
   I haven t been able to establish any relationship between this 
venture and those of the NSPOT  but there might be a connection   
While Taiwan has the financing to pursue several ventures  the 
current Taiwanese telecommunications market might not support two 
separate sastellite ventures  
   The reported name for the Tiawanese Chinese system is  Asiasat 
    but I don t thinks this has any relationship with the existing 
Hong Kong based  Asiasat  program involving Chinese  Hong Kong  and 
other Asian investors  other than using it as an organizational 
model   There are some obvious advantages to pursuing such a joing 
venture    it could provide excellent first hand experience to 
Taiwan for a very low cost  which then can be used in later 
satellite ventures   But there are internal political issues between 
Taiwanese and Chinese ventures  but putting any joint venture 
through a  Hong Kong intermediary corporation might allow it to 
proceed  
   In any case  the East Asian satellite market is lighting up with 
substantially growth projected in space services and revenues   This 
is just another indicator to add to the list   

    SOUTH KOREA ANNOUNCES NATIONAL MOVE INTO SPACE TECHNOLOGIES
   South Korea s Trade  Industry and Resources Ministry recently 
announced plans to invest US    B in research and development and 
another US    B into manufacturing and research facilities for 
advanced aerospace technologies   Space technologies have been 
specifically targeted as part of this program  beginning with 
manufacture and launch of an advanced multi purpose satellite by 
       The objective of this investment is to raise South Korea s 
aerospace technology to the level of the world s top    countries by 
                                      
    Commentary  South Korea has been quietly working to develop its 
national aerospace industry  specifically including space 
activities  I m noting this as a flag that potential new players are 
coming into the commercial space market  
   As part of their national effort    national telecommunications 
satellites for Korea Telecom will be launched in April and Oct      
on Delta  Designated Koreasat   and    the platforms will provide 
television and telephone service throughout the Korean Peninsula  
southwestern Japan and portions of China bordering North Korea  
   South Korea launched its first small satellite piggyback on 
Ariane in Aug       called Uribyol    Our Star  and costing about US 
     M   Uribyol   is planned for piggyback launch in October of 
this year  again on Ariane  and will be entirely  made in Korea    
Uribyol    projected for a      launch  will be an environment 
monitoring micro satellite  
   This satellite may be the precursor to a series of small Earth 
observation satellites   The KEOS  Korean Earth Observation System  
project  which has been submitted for approval to the South Korean 
government  would use two or three     kg spacecraft equipped with 
optical and microwave sensors 
   South Korean press reports claim there is also a parallel 
military effort to establish the capabilities for building and 
launching small military satellites by        Supposedly a 
government panel had been established to oversee such an effort  
funded at US       M between      and       in anticipation of an  
expected pullout of U S  intelligence gathering systems from the 
Korean peninsula        
   In conjunction with all of these reported efforts  South Korean 
is also pursuing production work either as off sets to existing 
aerospace technology contracts  for example  McDonnell Douglas is 
offsetting production of some Delta parts to South Korean firms as 
part of the Koreasat launch contracts   or for production of 
consumer space items  among other products  South Korea exports 
satellite receiver television setups to Japan  and Samsung has 
announced teaming for production of OSC s Orbcomm user terminals     
   This looks like a very aggressive push into space technologies   
Considering that East Asia is currently the fastest growing sector 
for commercial space services  primarily for telecommunications   a 
South Korean push into space technologies may change the composition 
of commercial space market there over the next decade   

    SPACE TECHNOLOGY INDEXES THROUGH MARCH
   As announced in the last CSN STI  each issue will give the 
results of stock indexes and portfolios regarding space stocks and 
investments   The table below summarizes results to the end of 
March   The Space Technology Index did quite a bit better than the 
market as a whole  as represented by the S P     index   Since      
of the values included in the index are US firms  this represents a 
general increase in the market value of space related firms   The 
increase in the first quarter is more than in all of         which 
is a very promising sign  although future months may reverse this 
trend  The Commercial Space Technology Index has also done quite 
well  but the Pure Play portfolio    consisting of stocks of firms 
which are pure plays in space technologies    has also surpassed its 
results in all of        We ll keep an eye on these     

   INDEX RESULTS THROUGH MARCH
                           Beginning  Beginning        Jan    to
                                                        Mar     
                                                             
   S P                                                           
   Space Tech Index                                              
   Comm l Space Tech Index                                       
   Space Tech Pure Plays                                         


FINAL NOTES   
    What   This column s already full   And I still have bunches of 
commercial space developments to report on   As I said at the start 
of this  column there s been a lot of interesting happenings   but 
I ll have to put them into the next issue   
   Looking ahead  I ve got several articles in the works on new 
happenings with Iridium and the LEO communications satellite market  
more news on international launchers appearing  and disappearing  on 
the market  new international commercial space ventures   and other 
interesting developments  
   And as always  I hope you folks find this stuff useful and 
interesting    Any and all comments are welcome  

                                                                 
Wales Larrison                          Space Technology Investor  
 Felicitas multos habet amicos              P O  Box      
                                        Seal Beach  CA           
